#summary A framework for creating Wordpress plugins.
#labels Phase-Design

= Introduction =

This Wiki page is dedicated to selecting an architecture for the WPF that will provide the best value-add features in terms of the following parameters.

  * *Usability* - Ease of use from the plugin developer's perspective.
  * *Maintainability* - Ease of use from the WPF developer's perspective.
  * *Performance* - Ease of use from the server's perspective.

= Architecture Options =

The current options available for the WPF architecture are listed below.

  *  *Original* - Keep the current architecture of the WPF.
  *  *Object-Based* - Update the WPF to utilize an architecture as described by Issue #17.

The current options available for the WPF installation architecture are listed below.

  *  *Per-Plugin WPF* - Each plugin is required to have it's own copy of the WPF.
  *  *Common WPF* - The WPF is installed in the root of the plugin's folder for all plugins to utilize.

= WPF Architecture Reviews =

The following subsections need to be filled in to provide information about the advantages and disadvantages of each architecture based on the criteria listed above.

*NOTE:* I have included one example in each table to use as a refernce for your additional information. Please delete the example after new data has been added to the table.

== Original Architecture ==

  || *Criteria Type* || *Advantage / Disadvantage* || *Data* ||
  || Usability || Advantage || Single class to implement. ||

== Object-Based Architecture ==

  || *Criteria Type* || *Advantage / Disadvantage* || *Data* ||
  || Usability || Advantage || More flexible design. ||

= WPF Installation Architecture Reviews =

The following subsections need to be filled in to provide information about the advantages and disadvantages of each installation architecture based on the criteria listed above.

== Per-Plugin WPF Architecture ==

  || *Criteria Type* || *Advantage / Disadvantage* || *Data* ||
  || Usability || Advantage || Less chance of breaking existing plugins with new WPF releases. ||

== Common WPF Installation Architecture ==

  || *Criteria Type* || *Advantage / Disadvantage* || *Data* ||
  || Usability || Advantage || Allows for ease of plugin updates by use of common code. ||